---
title: "Teaching Philosophy"
date: 2018-06-15T23:22:44-05:00
draft: false
author: "Emma"
---
<br>

As an educator, I am invested in developing dynamic classrooms utilizing creative pedagogy that inspires student engagement.  I approach each class as an opportunity to explore the study of religion with students as they learn to apply new concepts to their own experiences and develop methods of understanding and empathizing with the experiences of others.  I also make every effort to bring a feminist perspective to the material I teach; I believe one of the most important things I can do as an educator is foreground an intersectional feminist perspective.  


 I believe that the most effective and productive approach to learning is collaborative.  In each class, I strive to generate a learning community where students, working together, are inspired to take ownership of the assigned materials and class topics.  I often begin class with some lecture style teaching that distills and synthesizes from the assigned texts.  After working with students to form a solid foundation, I encourage them to work either as small groups or as a large group to explore what they are learning in new and synergetic ways.  This approach also allows me to gauge students’ levels of comprehension of the texts and material based on what develops during discussion.  As a result, my class time tends to be flexibly structured to allow us to focus our attention on topics from the assigned materials that students find relevant, challenging, or confusing.  As the semester progresses, I find that students tend to rely on each other more than they do on me often coming up with new and exciting ideas and interpretations of their own.  


 I encourage active learning by designing activities that require students to get up, move, and collaboratively create something together.  Often students, working in small groups, will work together at the white (or chalk) board to visualize class topics in new ways.  Through the construction of timelines, venn diagrams, and outlines, students often start to see connections among topics and ideas that had not occurred to them yet.  Many times, by the end of our class meeting, students are inspired to take photos of their work so that they can carry the ideas and connections they have developed with them - often utilizing the photos again to write their papers and prepare for their exams.


 By utilizing a variety of materials - texts like books, journal articles, and popular publications as well as video clips, films, blogs and other digital media - I work to engage students in different ways.  When practical, I also make an effort to bring in speakers who can discuss class topics in relevant ways and respond to students’ questions interactively, which often allows them to experience class material in multidimensional ways that enhance our reading, learning, lecturing, and discussing together.  Finally, assigned service learning as well as field work allows students to experience what they are learning in my classes in an applied fashion that cannot be achieved in the classroom alone.  By employing a wide range of teaching styles and tools, I approach both teaching and learning in a multifaceted way that is intended to encourage growth and development in students by presenting and responding to a variety of learning styles while promoting a deeper comprehension of the class topics than students had when they first entered my classroom.


 Beyond teaching the content of each course, I am also committed to teaching academic skills, which students can utilize not only in my courses but throughout their academic careers.  In addition to discussing test taking, public speaking, and efficient reading strategies, I am especially invested in exploring the writing process in each class.  Having found that many students struggle constructing an organized paper with a coherent, defensible thesis, I typically break the process down and explore methods and tools that will help them develop their approach to writing.  In addition to assigning one or two long papers, I tend to assign half a dozen or more shorter papers so that we can explore different steps of the writing process in a cumulative fashion.  I have found that students often show significant improvement in their writing and argumentation with each new writing assignment as the semester progresses.  Making time to explore some of the skills required to be successful academically means that not only do my students have the opportunity to learn from content that will challenge their critically thinking but also develop useful tools and strategies that they can apply in future classes in a variety of disciplines.
